# wildfire-risk-tool

## Abstract

Our project will address the capacity of machine learning models to understand forest fires in two different areas. We will first predict the area of different forest fires occurring in Portugal by selecting and applying a model to a University of California Irvine dataset, and then use a dataset detailing fires in Algeria to predict the likelihood of fires occurring. We will train and validate our area prediction model on the Portugal data, and apply it to the Algeria dataset, following an unsupervised workflow. To execute this project, we will research different models that help predict natural hazards like forest fires before selecting and applying one, and review past studies, such as Coretz and Morais, to inform the direction of our analysis. We also plan to write a paper outlining the ethics and implications of relying on machine learning algorithms to predict natural hazards. Finally, using meteorological data in the United States, we will create a map of areas at-risk of forest fires, comparing it to existing forest watch maps. 

We will consider this project a success if we successfully train two machine learning models to predict expected area of fires in Portugal and the likelihood of fires in Algeria, and are able to apply these models more broadly. We also will be successful if we create a map of wildfire risk in the US, and are able to compare it to existing ones. Our success depends on conducting a review of prior studies, exploring our datasets, researching and selecting an appropriate model, and writing/reflecting on using computers for predicting natural disasters and risk. 
 

## Motivation and Question
Climate change has increased the likelihood of a variety of extreme weather events, including wildfires. These wildfires pose risks to both human and ecological communities. In this project, we plan to use two datasets to predict wildfire likelihood and wildfire area given meteorological data. Our first dataset, the Algerian Forest Fires Dataset, contains fire and non-fire events with 11 attributes that describe weather characteristics at the time of that event. Our second dataset, the Forest Fires Dataset, contains data from Montesinho National Park, Portugal. This dataset contains many of the same weather characteristics as the Algerian dataset, but contains only fire events. Rather than using this dataset to predict whether a fire occurred in a given area, it can be used to predict the size of a fire. We propose to create two wildfire prediction models, one that is trained and validated on the Algerian dataset to predict whether or not a forest fire will occur given certain meteorological conditions and another that is trained and validated on the Portugal dataset to predict forest fire area given many of the same features. Rather than developing our own algorithms, we are planning on using existing models such as Random Forest and SVM and spending our time focusing on model and feature selection. After training and validating our models, we will examine feature importance across models, asking if the same features are most important in determining both wildfire risk and size. Being able to predict wildfire risk and size of areas has a variety of useful applications, such as resources management in protected areas/national parks and planning wildfire mitigation strategies. Our final research question is whether we can use the models we create to predict wildfire risk in the United States. We want to use our models on US meteorological data (probably from USGS or NOAA) to construct a map of wildfire risk in the US. While we won’t be able to validate our map directly, we can compare it to existing US wildfire prediction tools (such as this one https://www.usgs.gov/fire-danger-forecast) to see if our predictions are reasonable.

## Planned Deliverables
We propose four main deliverables for this project:
1. A code repository which contains all of our code for data preparation and cleaning, model training and prediction, and evaluation.
2. One (or two) Jupyter notebooks that contain exploratory data analysis and testing of our models.
3. A short essay about the implications of using machine learning and automated tools for ecological forecasting (both risks and benefits).
4. A map of wildfire risk in the United States constructed using our models and US meteorological data.


## Resources Required
Thankfully, much of what we need, we already have. We have a dataset for forest fires in Algeria (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nitinchoudhary012/algerian-forest-fires-dataset) which we will use to train a model classifying whether or not fires occur, and we have a dataset for forest fires in Portugal (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/forest+fires) for which we will train a model predicting total burned area. Other than this, because these datasets are not very large the computing power available on our personal computers should be sufficient for training, testing, and experimentation.

We also want to find meteorological data for the whole US to see if we can predict areas most at risk for forest fires. Finding this data may be challenging, and it also has the potential to be computationally expensive as this is a very large area to find data for.

We also will need to explore background literature and academic studies relating to the use of Machine Learning in exploring/predicting natural hazards, especially wildfires. One aim of our project is to explore the applications of ML to ecological/environmental conservation and protection, so finding academic resources relating to this topic is important.


## What You Will Learn


Madeleine: I am excited to apply machine learning to spatial analysis, which this project provides a great opportunity for. I am most looking forward to exploring meteorological data and creating a risk map of forest fires in the U.S. This project also ties in to my overall goals for this course. Throughout the semester, I have been the most interested in focusing on implementation and social responsibility. I think exploring forest fires and their spatial implications, especially applying our models to different areas to predict fire risk, will help me practice implementation. Considering the ethics of machine learning models for predicting environmental risk will help me engage with the social responsibility goal. Ultimately, I want to learn about the applications of machine learning in environmental monitoring and spatial analysis, and think this project will provide the perfect chance to do so. 

Eliza: I am hoping to develop implementation and experimentation skills throughout this project, and to practice scientific communication. One of my main goals for the course and project was to gain familiarity experimenting with data, specifically using scientific computing, visualization, and data analysis tools that I would use in a future career. I will get to practice these skills during most steps of this project - when performing exploratory data analysis, experimenting with different models and feature selection techniques in scikit-learn, and testing our models/visualizing results. I am also excited that this project will allow me to practice scientific communication skills, specifically helping to create a map of wildfire risk and contribute to our final project report. I am particularly excited about developing a wildfire prediction tool because I am interested in using technical skills to address pertinent environmental issues.

Nhi: I am excited to practice more implementation and social responsibility skills via this project, as they are my two focus areas for the class. Beyond that, this project will allow me to apply the concepts I’ve learned in machine learning towards other areas of study. I am looking forward to creating a public facing project that is also multidisciplinary, connecting computer science, environmental studies, and spatial analysis together. As I have stated in my reflection, I hope to explore more prediction models in scikit-learn and analyze their performance on certain datasets. I am curious to see whether certain models will perform better on one of our dataset versus the other, as the two datasets share different features and purposes. Lastly, this project will help me dive deeper into the process of machine learning by having us be involved in every step of the way from creating the project proposal and finding the datasets to implementing the models and writing up the analysis.  

Wright: Like Madeleine, I'm excited to apply machine learning to a problem dealing with geography and spatial analysis. At the beginning of my class, my goals were to focus on implementation and experimentation, and I think that this project is a great
opportunity to spend some time on both of these goals. Specifically, my hope is that this project will help me gain more skills with model selection and training, data vizualization, and applying a model trained on a specific dataset to other applications with different datasets. Ultimately, I think that this project will give me a toolkit I can use to predict risk of natural hazards other than just forest fires across the US and the world, which is an exciting skillset to have moving forward.

## Risk Statement
We need to be wary of overfitting our models; the size of our datasets are a big factor. We will be training models on small datasets which means that it will be difficult to avoid training a model that has limited application beyond the specific geographic range represented in the Portuguese or Algerian forest fires datasets. We should keep this in mind instead of trying to achieve perfect predictive and classification accuracy, no matter the cost. Additionally, while we have many features relating to weather and climate in our dataset, there are other important features that are not represented in the data: what species of trees are native to the region, what the density of undergrowth is on the forest floor, if the region is grazed by animals, soil pH, and more. It’s possible that these are just as significant as weather and climate in causing forest fires, and the absence of these data could hamper our ability to train accurate models.

## Ethics Statement
Wildfires can have tremendous impacts on the local population and environment. Over the last few decades, we have seen places facing longer fire seasons and more severe fires. Thus, being able to predict wildfire risk and size of burnt areas can enable better fire management, mitigation, and evacuation decisions. These predictions locating areas with high wildfire risks are essential to wildfire emergency response, allowing for optimal allocation of resources and a quick plan of action. Moreover, wildfire firefighters can develop more precise targeted fire-prevention measures that can save hundreds of lives and minimize damages to the ecosystems. Evidently, this can also reduce the economic impacts of wildfires. By creating  more precise fire-prevention measures, wildfire management can reduce the cost of resources and the financial losses caused by fire damage. Industries that are specifically affected by wildfires such as the agriculture, energy and utility, and tourism sectors can also benefit greatly from wildfire risk predictions. Most importantly, the livelihood of local communities near at-risk wildfire areas can be protected from these predictions. 

Nevertheless, groups of people could potentially be excluded from benefitting from our project. Since the datasets we use in this project are taken from regions of Algeria and Portugal,  our model could potentially capture regional trends that won’t generalize well when extended to other regions of the world. Thus, other areas that differ in climate and geography might be excluded from the results of this project. In addition, environmental data is historically collected in more affluent areas. Thus, our datasets might fall short in capturing more remote places. 

Overall, we still believe our project will make the world a better place. 
1. Predicting the likelihood of wildfire occurring in a given region will enable better fire management, mitigation, and evacuation decisions.
2. Identifying areas with high wildfire risks allows for optimal allocation of resources and reduces the economic impacts of wildfires.
3. Wildfire predictions can help protect the land, wildlife, and nearby communities


## Tentative Timeline
In three weeks, we will have reviewed prior machine learning studies that focus on predicting natural hazards, and have researched potential models, selecting an appropriate one to apply to our research. We will have cleaned and explored our datasets, and thought about the implications of using machine learning to predict natural hazards. We will also have drafted the paper on machine learning in ecological forecasting. In the last couple of weeks, we will implement our models, finalize our paper, and create our map predicting fires using meteorological data. 

## 
